<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 3</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-3" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2>
				<span epub:type="label">Act</span>
				<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">III</span>
			</h2>
			<section id="scene-3-1" epub:type="z3998:scene">
				<h3>
					<span epub:type="label">Scene</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">I</span>
				</h3>
				<p>A forest in the north of England.</p>
				<table>
					<tbody>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter two Keepers, with cross-bows in their hands</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">First Keeper</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Under this thick-grown brake we'll shroud ourselves;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For through this laund anon the deer will come;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And in this covert will we make our stand,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Culling the principal of all the deer.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Second Keeper</td>
							<td>I'll stay above the hill, so both may shoot.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">First Keeper</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>That cannot be; the noise of thy cross-bow</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Will scare the herd, and so my shoot is lost.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Here stand we both, and aim we at the best:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And, for the time shall not seem tedious,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I'll tell thee what befell me on a day</span>
									<br/>
									<span>In this self-place where now we mean to stand.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Second Keeper</td>
							<td>Here comes a man; let's stay till he be past. <i>Enter KING HENRY VI, disguised, with a prayerbook</i></td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">KING HENRY VI</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>From Scotland am I stol'n, even of pure love,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To greet mine own land with my wishful sight.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>No, Harry, Harry, 'tis no land of thine;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Thy place is fill'd, thy sceptre wrung from thee,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Thy balm wash'd off wherewith thou wast anointed:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>No bending knee will call thee Caesar now,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>No humble suitors press to speak for right,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>No, not a man comes for redress of thee;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For how can I help them, and not myself?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">First Keeper</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Ay, here's a deer whose skin's a keeper's fee:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>This is the quondam king; let's seize upon him.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">KING HENRY VI</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Let me embrace thee, sour adversity,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For wise men say it is the wisest course.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Second Keeper</td>
							<td>Why linger we? let us lay hands upon him.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">First Keeper</td>
							<td>Forbear awhile; we'll hear a little more.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">KING HENRY VI</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>My queen and son are gone to France for aid;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And, as I hear, the great commanding Warwick</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Is thither gone, to crave the French king's sister</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To wife for Edward: if this news be true,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Poor queen and son, your labour is but lost;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For Warwick is a subtle orator,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And Lewis a prince soon won with moving words.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>By this account then Margaret may win him;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For she's a woman to be pitied much:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Her sighs will make a battery in his breast;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Her tears will pierce into a marble heart;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The tiger will be mild whiles she doth mourn;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And Nero will be tainted with remorse,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To hear and see her plaints, her brinish tears.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Ay, but she's come to beg, Warwick to give;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>She, on his left side, craving aid for Henry,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>He, on his right, asking a wife for Edward.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>She weeps, and says her Henry is deposed;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>He smiles, and says his Edward is install'd;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That she, poor wretch, for grief can speak no more;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Whiles Warwick tells his title, smooths the wrong,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Inferreth arguments of mighty strength,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And in conclusion wins the king from her,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>With promise of his sister, and what else,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To strengthen and support King Edward's place.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>O Margaret, thus 'twill be; and thou, poor soul,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Art then forsaken, as thou went'st forlorn!</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Second Keeper</td>
							<td>Say, what art thou that talk'st of kings and queens?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">KING HENRY VI</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>More than I seem, and less than I was born to:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>A man at least, for less I should not be;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And men may talk of kings, and why not I?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Second Keeper</td>
							<td>Ay, but thou talk'st as if thou wert a king.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">KING HENRY VI</td>
							<td>Why, so I am, in mind; and that's enough.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Second Keeper</td>
							<td>But, if thou be a king, where is thy crown?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">KING HENRY VI</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>My crown is in my heart, not on my head;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Not decked with diamonds and Indian stones,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Nor to be seen: my crown is called content:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>A crown it is that seldom kings enjoy.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Second Keeper</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Well, if you be a king crown'd with content,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Your crown content and you must be contented</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To go along with us; for as we think,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>You are the king King Edward hath deposed;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And we his subjects sworn in all allegiance</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Will apprehend you as his enemy.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">KING HENRY VI</td>
							<td>But did you never swear, and break an oath?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Second Keeper</td>
							<td>No, never such an oath; nor will not now.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">KING HENRY VI</td>
							<td>Where did you dwell when I was King of England?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Second Keeper</td>
							<td>Here in this country, where we now remain.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">KING HENRY VI</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>I was anointed king at nine months old;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>My father and my grandfather were kings,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And you were sworn true subjects unto me:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And tell me, then, have you not broke your oaths?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">First Keeper</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>No;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For we were subjects but while you were king.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">KING HENRY VI</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Why, am I dead? do I not breathe a man?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Ah, simple men, you know not what you swear!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Look, as I blow this feather from my face,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And as the air blows it to me again,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Obeying with my wind when I do blow,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And yielding to another when it blows,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Commanded always by the greater gust;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Such is the lightness of you common men.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But do not break your oaths; for of that sin</span>
									<br/>
									<span>My mild entreaty shall not make you guilty.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Go where you will, the king shall be commanded;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And be you kings, command, and I'll obey.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">First Keeper</td>
							<td>We are true subjects to the king, King Edward.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">KING HENRY VI</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>So would you be again to Henry,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>If he were seated as King Edward is.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">First Keeper</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>We charge you, in God's name, and the king's,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To go with us unto the officers.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">KING HENRY VI</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>In God's name, lead; your king's name be obey'd:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And what God will, that let your king perform;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And what he will, I humbly yield unto. <i>Exeunt</i></span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
					</tbody>
				</table>
			</section>
			<section id="scene-3-2" epub:type="z3998:scene">
				<h3>
					<span epub:type="label">Scene</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">II</span>
				</h3>
				<p>London. The palace.</p>
				<table>
					<tbody>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter KING EDWARD IV, GLOUCESTER, CLARENCE, and LADY GREY</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">KING EDWARD IV</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Brother of Gloucester, at Saint Alban's field</span>
									<br/>
									<span>This lady's husband, Sir Richard Grey, was slain,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>His lands then seized on by the conqueror:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Her suit is now to repossess those lands;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Which we in justice cannot well deny,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Because in quarrel of the house of York</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The worthy gentleman did lose his life.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">GLOUCESTER</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Your highness shall do well to grant her suit;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>It were dishonour to deny it her.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">KING EDWARD IV</td>
							<td>It were no less; but yet I'll make a pause.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">GLOUCESTER</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>[Aside to CLARENCE] Yea, is it so?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I see the lady hath a thing to grant,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Before the king will grant her humble suit.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">CLARENCE</td>
							<td>[Aside to GLOUCESTER] He knows the game: how true he keeps the wind!</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">GLOUCESTER</td>
							<td>[Aside to CLARENCE] Silence!</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">KING EDWARD IV</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Widow, we will consider of your suit;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And come some other time to know our mind.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">LADY GREY</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Right gracious lord, I cannot brook delay:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>May it please your highness to resolve me now;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And what your pleasure is, shall satisfy me.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">GLOUCESTER</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>[Aside to CLARENCE] Ay, widow? then I'll warrant</span>
									<br/>
									<span>you all your lands,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>An if what pleases him shall pleasure you.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Fight closer, or, good faith, you'll catch a blow.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">CLARENCE</td>
							<td>[Aside to GLOUCESTER] I fear her not, unless she chance to fall.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">GLOUCESTER</td>
							<td>[Aside to CLARENCE] God forbid that! for he'll take vantages.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">KING EDWARD IV</td>
							<td>How many children hast thou, widow? tell me.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">CLARENCE</td>
							<td>[Aside to GLOUCESTER] I think he means to beg a child of her.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">GLOUCESTER</td>
							<td>[Aside to CLARENCE] Nay, whip me then: he'll rather give her two.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">LADY GREY</td>
							<td>Three, my most gracious lord.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">GLOUCESTER</td>
							<td>[Aside to CLARENCE] You shall have four, if you'll be ruled by him.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">KING EDWARD IV</td>
							<td>'Twere pity they should lose their father's lands.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">LADY GREY</td>
							<td>Be pitiful, dread lord, and grant it then.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">KING EDWARD IV</td>
							<td>Lords, give us leave: I'll try this widow's wit.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">GLOUCESTER</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>[Aside to CLARENCE] Ay, good leave have you; for you will have leave,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Till youth take leave and leave you to the crutch. <i>GLOUCESTER and CLARENCE retire</i></span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">KING EDWARD IV</td>
							<td>Now tell me, madam, do you love your children?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">LADY GREY</td>
							<td>Ay, full as dearly as I love myself.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">KING EDWARD IV</td>
							<td>And would you not do much to do them good?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">LADY GREY</td>
							<td>To do them good, I would sustain some harm.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">KING EDWARD IV</td>
							<td>Then get your husband's lands, to do them good.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">LADY GREY</td>
							<td>Therefore I came unto your majesty.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">KING EDWARD IV</td>
							<td>I'll tell you how these lands are to be got.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">LADY GREY</td>
							<td>So shall you bind me to your highness' service.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">KING EDWARD IV</td>
							<td>What service wilt thou do me, if I give them?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">LADY GREY</td>
							<td>What you command, that rests in me to do.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">KING EDWARD IV</td>
							<td>But you will take exceptions to my boon.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">LADY GREY</td>
							<td>No, gracious lord, except I cannot do it.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">KING EDWARD IV</td>
							<td>Ay, but thou canst do what I mean to ask.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">LADY GREY</td>
							<td>Why, then I will do what your grace commands.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">GLOUCESTER</td>
							<td>[Aside to CLARENCE] He plies her hard; and much rain wears the marble.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">CLARENCE</td>
							<td>[Aside to GLOUCESTER] As red as fire! nay, then her wax must melt.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">LADY GREY</td>
							<td>Why stops my lord, shall I not hear my task?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">KING EDWARD IV</td>
							<td>An easy task; 'tis but to love a king.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">LADY GREY</td>
							<td>That's soon perform'd, because I am a subject.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">KING EDWARD IV</td>
							<td>Why, then, thy husband's lands I freely give thee.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">LADY GREY</td>
							<td>I take my leave with many thousand thanks.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">GLOUCESTER</td>
							<td>[Aside to CLARENCE] The match is made; she seals it with a curtsy.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">KING EDWARD IV</td>
							<td>But stay thee, 'tis the fruits of love I mean.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">LADY GREY</td>
							<td>The fruits of love I mean, my loving liege.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">KING EDWARD IV</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Ay, but, I fear me, in another sense.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>What love, think'st thou, I sue so much to get?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">LADY GREY</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>My love till death, my humble thanks, my prayers;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That love which virtue begs and virtue grants.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">KING EDWARD IV</td>
							<td>No, by my troth, I did not mean such love.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">LADY GREY</td>
							<td>Why, then you mean not as I thought you did.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">KING EDWARD IV</td>
							<td>But now you partly may perceive my mind.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">LADY GREY</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>My mind will never grant what I perceive</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Your highness aims at, if I aim aright.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">KING EDWARD IV</td>
							<td>To tell thee plain, I aim to lie with thee.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">LADY GREY</td>
							<td>To tell you plain, I had rather lie in prison.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">KING EDWARD IV</td>
							<td>Why, then thou shalt not have thy husband's lands.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">LADY GREY</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Why, then mine honesty shall be my dower;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For by that loss I will not purchase them.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">KING EDWARD IV</td>
							<td>Therein thou wrong'st thy children mightily.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">LADY GREY</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Herein your highness wrongs both them and me.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But, mighty lord, this merry inclination</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Accords not with the sadness of my suit:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Please you dismiss me either with 'ay' or 'no.'</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">KING EDWARD IV</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Ay, if thou wilt say 'ay' to my request;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>No if thou dost say 'no' to my demand.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">LADY GREY</td>
							<td>Then, no, my lord. My suit is at an end.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">GLOUCESTER</td>
							<td>[Aside to CLARENCE] The widow likes him not, she knits her brows.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">CLARENCE</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>[Aside to GLOUCESTER] He is the bluntest wooer in</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Christendom.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">KING EDWARD IV</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>[Aside] Her looks do argue her replete with modesty;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Her words do show her wit incomparable;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>All her perfections challenge sovereignty:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>One way or other, she is for a king;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And she shall be my love, or else my queen.--</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Say that King Edward take thee for his queen?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">LADY GREY</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>'Tis better said than done, my gracious lord:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I am a subject fit to jest withal,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But far unfit to be a sovereign.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">KING EDWARD IV</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Sweet widow, by my state I swear to thee</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I speak no more than what my soul intends;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And that is, to enjoy thee for my love.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">LADY GREY</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>And that is more than I will yield unto:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I know I am too mean to be your queen,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And yet too good to be your concubine.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">KING EDWARD IV</td>
							<td>You cavil, widow: I did mean, my queen.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">LADY GREY</td>
							<td>'Twill grieve your grace my sons should call you father.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">KING EDWARD IV</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>No more than when my daughters call thee mother.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Thou art a widow, and thou hast some children;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And, by God's mother, I, being but a bachelor,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Have other some: why, 'tis a happy thing</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To be the father unto many sons.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Answer no more, for thou shalt be my queen.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">GLOUCESTER</td>
							<td>[Aside to CLARENCE] The ghostly father now hath done his shrift.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">CLARENCE</td>
							<td>[Aside to GLOUCESTER] When he was made a shriver, 'twas for shift.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">KING EDWARD IV</td>
							<td>Brothers, you muse what chat we two have had.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">GLOUCESTER</td>
							<td>The widow likes it not, for she looks very sad.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">KING EDWARD IV</td>
							<td>You'll think it strange if I should marry her.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">CLARENCE</td>
							<td>To whom, my lord?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">KING EDWARD IV</td>
							<td>Why, Clarence, to myself.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">GLOUCESTER</td>
							<td>That would be ten days' wonder at the least.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">CLARENCE</td>
							<td>That's a day longer than a wonder lasts.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">GLOUCESTER</td>
							<td>By so much is the wonder in extremes.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">KING EDWARD IV</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Well, jest on, brothers: I can tell you both</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Her suit is granted for her husband's lands. <i>Enter a Nobleman</i></span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Nobleman</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>My gracious lord, Henry your foe is taken,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And brought your prisoner to your palace gate.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">KING EDWARD IV</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>See that he be convey'd unto the Tower:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And go we, brothers, to the man that took him,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To question of his apprehension.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Widow, go you along. Lords, use her honourably. <i>Exeunt all but GLOUCESTER</i></span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">GLOUCESTER</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Ay, Edward will use women honourably.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Would he were wasted, marrow, bones and all,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That from his loins no hopeful branch may spring,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To cross me from the golden time I look for!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And yet, between my soul's desire and me--</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The lustful Edward's title buried--</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Is Clarence, Henry, and his son young Edward,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And all the unlook'd for issue of their bodies,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To take their rooms, ere I can place myself:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>A cold premeditation for my purpose!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Why, then, I do but dream on sovereignty;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Like one that stands upon a promontory,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And spies a far-off shore where he would tread,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Wishing his foot were equal with his eye,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And chides the sea that sunders him from thence,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Saying, he'll lade it dry to have his way:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>So do I wish the crown, being so far off;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And so I chide the means that keeps me from it;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And so I say, I'll cut the causes off,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Flattering me with impossibilities.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>My eye's too quick, my heart o'erweens too much,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Unless my hand and strength could equal them.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Well, say there is no kingdom then for Richard;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>What other pleasure can the world afford?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I'll make my heaven in a lady's lap,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And deck my body in gay ornaments,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And witch sweet ladies with my words and looks.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>O miserable thought! and more unlikely</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Than to accomplish twenty golden crowns!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Why, love forswore me in my mother's womb:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And, for I should not deal in her soft laws,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>She did corrupt frail nature with some bribe,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To shrink mine arm up like a wither'd shrub;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To make an envious mountain on my back,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Where sits deformity to mock my body;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To shape my legs of an unequal size;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To disproportion me in every part,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Like to a chaos, or an unlick'd bear-whelp</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That carries no impression like the dam.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And am I then a man to be beloved?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>O monstrous fault, to harbour such a thought!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Then, since this earth affords no joy to me,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But to command, to cheque, to o'erbear such</span>
									<br/>
									<span>As are of better person than myself,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I'll make my heaven to dream upon the crown,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And, whiles I live, to account this world but hell,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Until my mis-shaped trunk that bears this head</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Be round impaled with a glorious crown.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And yet I know not how to get the crown,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For many lives stand between me and home:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And I,--like one lost in a thorny wood,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That rends the thorns and is rent with the thorns,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Seeking a way and straying from the way;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Not knowing how to find the open air,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But toiling desperately to find it out,--</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Torment myself to catch the English crown:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And from that torment I will free myself,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Or hew my way out with a bloody axe.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Why, I can smile, and murder whiles I smile,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And cry 'Content' to that which grieves my heart,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And wet my cheeks with artificial tears,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And frame my face to all occasions.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I'll drown more sailors than the mermaid shall;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I'll slay more gazers than the basilisk;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I'll play the orator as well as Nestor,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Deceive more slily than Ulysses could,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And, like a Sinon, take another Troy.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I can add colours to the chameleon,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Change shapes with Proteus for advantages,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And set the murderous Machiavel to school.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Can I do this, and cannot get a crown?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Tut, were it farther off, I'll pluck it down. <i>Exit</i></span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
					</tbody>
				</table>
			</section>
			<section id="scene-3-3" epub:type="z3998:scene">
				<h3>
					<span epub:type="label">Scene</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">III</span>
				</h3>
				<p>France. KING LEWIS XI's palace.</p>
				<table>
					<tbody>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Flourish. Enter KING LEWIS XI, his sister BONA, his Admiral, called BOURBON, PRINCE EDWARD, QUEEN MARGARET, and OXFORD. KING LEWIS XI sits, and riseth up again</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">KING LEWIS XI</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Fair Queen of England, worthy Margaret,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Sit down with us: it ill befits thy state</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And birth, that thou shouldst stand while Lewis doth sit.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">QUEEN MARGARET</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>No, mighty King of France: now Margaret</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Must strike her sail and learn awhile to serve</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Where kings command. I was, I must confess,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Great Albion's queen in former golden days:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But now mischance hath trod my title down,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And with dishonour laid me on the ground;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Where I must take like seat unto my fortune,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And to my humble seat conform myself.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">KING LEWIS XI</td>
							<td>Why, say, fair queen, whence springs this deep despair?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">QUEEN MARGARET</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>From such a cause as fills mine eyes with tears</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And stops my tongue, while heart is drown'd in cares.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">KING LEWIS XI</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Whate'er it be, be thou still like thyself,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And sit thee by our side: <i>Seats her by him</i></span>
									<br/>
									<span>Yield not thy neck</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To fortune's yoke, but let thy dauntless mind</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Still ride in triumph over all mischance.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Be plain, Queen Margaret, and tell thy grief;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>It shall be eased, if France can yield relief.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">QUEEN MARGARET</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Those gracious words revive my drooping thoughts</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And give my tongue-tied sorrows leave to speak.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Now, therefore, be it known to noble Lewis,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That Henry, sole possessor of my love,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Is of a king become a banish'd man,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And forced to live in Scotland a forlorn;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>While proud ambitious Edward Duke of York</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Usurps the regal title and the seat</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Of England's true-anointed lawful king.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>This is the cause that I, poor Margaret,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>With this my son, Prince Edward, Henry's heir,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Am come to crave thy just and lawful aid;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And if thou fail us, all our hope is done:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Scotland hath will to help, but cannot help;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Our people and our peers are both misled,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Our treasures seized, our soldiers put to flight,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And, as thou seest, ourselves in heavy plight.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">KING LEWIS XI</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Renowned queen, with patience calm the storm,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>While we bethink a means to break it off.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">QUEEN MARGARET</td>
							<td>The more we stay, the stronger grows our foe.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">KING LEWIS XI</td>
							<td>The more I stay, the more I'll succor thee.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">QUEEN MARGARET</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>O, but impatience waiteth on true sorrow.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And see where comes the breeder of my sorrow! <i>Enter WARWICK</i></span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">KING LEWIS XI</td>
							<td>What's he approacheth boldly to our presence?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">QUEEN MARGARET</td>
							<td>Our Earl of Warwick, Edward's greatest friend.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">KING LEWIS XI</td>
							<td>Welcome, brave Warwick! What brings thee to France? <i>He descends. She ariseth</i></td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">QUEEN MARGARET</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Ay, now begins a second storm to rise;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For this is he that moves both wind and tide.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">WARWICK</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>From worthy Edward, King of Albion,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>My lord and sovereign, and thy vowed friend,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I come, in kindness and unfeigned love,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>First, to do greetings to thy royal person;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And then to crave a league of amity;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And lastly, to confirm that amity</span>
									<br/>
									<span>With a nuptial knot, if thou vouchsafe to grant</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That virtuous Lady Bona, thy fair sister,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To England's king in lawful marriage.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">QUEEN MARGARET</td>
							<td>[Aside] If that go forward, Henry's hope is done.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">WARWICK</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>[To BONA] And, gracious madam, in our king's behalf,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I am commanded, with your leave and favour,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Humbly to kiss your hand, and with my tongue</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To tell the passion of my sovereign's heart;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Where fame, late entering at his heedful ears,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Hath placed thy beauty's image and thy virtue.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">QUEEN MARGARET</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>King Lewis and Lady Bona, hear me speak,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Before you answer Warwick. His demand</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Springs not from Edward's well-meant honest love,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But from deceit bred by necessity;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For how can tyrants safely govern home,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Unless abroad they purchase great alliance?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To prove him tyrant this reason may suffice,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That Henry liveth still: but were he dead,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Yet here Prince Edward stands, King Henry's son.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Look, therefore, Lewis, that by this league and marriage</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Thou draw not on thy danger and dishonour;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For though usurpers sway the rule awhile,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Yet heavens are just, and time suppresseth wrongs.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">WARWICK</td>
							<td>Injurious Margaret!</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">PRINCE EDWARD</td>
							<td>And why not queen?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">WARWICK</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Because thy father Henry did usurp;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And thou no more are prince than she is queen.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">OXFORD</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Then Warwick disannuls great John of Gaunt,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Which did subdue the greatest part of Spain;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And, after John of Gaunt, Henry the Fourth,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Whose wisdom was a mirror to the wisest;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And, after that wise prince, Henry the Fifth,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Who by his prowess conquered all France:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>From these our Henry lineally descends.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">WARWICK</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Oxford, how haps it, in this smooth discourse,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>You told not how Henry the Sixth hath lost</span>
									<br/>
									<span>All that which Henry Fifth had gotten?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Methinks these peers of France should smile at that.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But for the rest, you tell a pedigree</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Of threescore and two years; a silly time</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To make prescription for a kingdom's worth.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">OXFORD</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Why, Warwick, canst thou speak against thy liege,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Whom thou obeyed'st thirty and six years,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And not bewray thy treason with a blush?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">WARWICK</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Can Oxford, that did ever fence the right,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Now buckler falsehood with a pedigree?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For shame! leave Henry, and call Edward king.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">OXFORD</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Call him my king by whose injurious doom</span>
									<br/>
									<span>My elder brother, the Lord Aubrey Vere,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Was done to death? and more than so, my father,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Even in the downfall of his mellow'd years,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>When nature brought him to the door of death?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>No, Warwick, no; while life upholds this arm,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>This arm upholds the house of Lancaster.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">WARWICK</td>
							<td>And I the house of York.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">KING LEWIS XI</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Queen Margaret, Prince Edward, and Oxford,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Vouchsafe, at our request, to stand aside,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>While I use further conference with Warwick. <i>They stand aloof</i></span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">QUEEN MARGARET</td>
							<td>Heavens grant that Warwick's words bewitch him not!</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">KING LEWIS XI</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Now Warwick, tell me, even upon thy conscience,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Is Edward your true king? for I were loath</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To link with him that were not lawful chosen.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">WARWICK</td>
							<td>Thereon I pawn my credit and mine honour.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">KING LEWIS XI</td>
							<td>But is he gracious in the people's eye?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">WARWICK</td>
							<td>The more that Henry was unfortunate.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">KING LEWIS XI</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Then further, all dissembling set aside,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Tell me for truth the measure of his love</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Unto our sister Bona.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">WARWICK</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Such it seems</span>
									<br/>
									<span>As may beseem a monarch like himself.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Myself have often heard him say and swear</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That this his love was an eternal plant,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Whereof the root was fix'd in virtue's ground,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The leaves and fruit maintain'd with beauty's sun,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Exempt from envy, but not from disdain,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Unless the Lady Bona quit his pain.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">KING LEWIS XI</td>
							<td>Now, sister, let us hear your firm resolve.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">BONA</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Your grant, or your denial, shall be mine: <i>To WARWICK</i></span>
									<br/>
									<span>Yet I confess that often ere this day,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>When I have heard your king's desert recounted,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Mine ear hath tempted judgment to desire.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">KING LEWIS XI</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Then, Warwick, thus: our sister shall be Edward's;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And now forthwith shall articles be drawn</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Touching the jointure that your king must make,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Which with her dowry shall be counterpoised.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Draw near, Queen Margaret, and be a witness</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That Bona shall be wife to the English king.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">PRINCE EDWARD</td>
							<td>To Edward, but not to the English king.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">QUEEN MARGARET</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Deceitful Warwick! it was thy device</span>
									<br/>
									<span>By this alliance to make void my suit:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Before thy coming Lewis was Henry's friend.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">KING LEWIS XI</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>And still is friend to him and Margaret:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But if your title to the crown be weak,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>As may appear by Edward's good success,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Then 'tis but reason that I be released</span>
									<br/>
									<span>From giving aid which late I promised.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Yet shall you have all kindness at my hand</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That your estate requires and mine can yield.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">WARWICK</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Henry now lives in Scotland at his ease,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Where having nothing, nothing can he lose.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And as for you yourself, our quondam queen,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>You have a father able to maintain you;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And better 'twere you troubled him than France.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">QUEEN MARGARET</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Peace, impudent and shameless Warwick, peace,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Proud setter up and puller down of kings!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I will not hence, till, with my talk and tears,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Both full of truth, I make King Lewis behold</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Thy sly conveyance and thy lord's false love;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For both of you are birds of selfsame feather. <i>Post blows a horn within</i></span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">KING LEWIS XI</td>
							<td>Warwick, this is some post to us or thee. <i>Enter a Post</i></td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Post</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>[To WARWICK] My lord ambassador, these letters are for you,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Sent from your brother, Marquess Montague: <i>To KING LEWIS XI</i></span>
									<br/>
									<span>These from our king unto your majesty: <i>To QUEEN MARGARET</i></span>
									<br/>
									<span>And, madam, these for you; from whom I know not. <i>They all read their letters</i></span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">OXFORD</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>I like it well that our fair queen and mistress</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Smiles at her news, while Warwick frowns at his.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">PRINCE EDWARD</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Nay, mark how Lewis stamps, as he were nettled:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I hope all's for the best.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">KING LEWIS XI</td>
							<td>Warwick, what are thy news? and yours, fair queen?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">QUEEN MARGARET</td>
							<td>Mine, such as fill my heart with unhoped joys.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">WARWICK</td>
							<td>Mine, full of sorrow and heart's discontent.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">KING LEWIS XI</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>What! has your king married the Lady Grey!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And now, to soothe your forgery and his,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Sends me a paper to persuade me patience?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Is this the alliance that he seeks with France?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Dare he presume to scorn us in this manner?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">QUEEN MARGARET</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>I told your majesty as much before:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>This proveth Edward's love and Warwick's honesty.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">WARWICK</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>King Lewis, I here protest, in sight of heaven,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And by the hope I have of heavenly bliss,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That I am clear from this misdeed of Edward's,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>No more my king, for he dishonours me,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But most himself, if he could see his shame.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Did I forget that by the house of York</span>
									<br/>
									<span>My father came untimely to his death?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Did I let pass the abuse done to my niece?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Did I impale him with the regal crown?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Did I put Henry from his native right?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And am I guerdon'd at the last with shame?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Shame on himself! for my desert is honour:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And to repair my honour lost for him,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I here renounce him and return to Henry.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>My noble queen, let former grudges pass,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And henceforth I am thy true servitor:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I will revenge his wrong to Lady Bona,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And replant Henry in his former state.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">QUEEN MARGARET</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Warwick, these words have turn'd my hate to love;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And I forgive and quite forget old faults,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And joy that thou becomest King Henry's friend.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">WARWICK</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>So much his friend, ay, his unfeigned friend,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That, if King Lewis vouchsafe to furnish us</span>
									<br/>
									<span>With some few bands of chosen soldiers,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I'll undertake to land them on our coast</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And force the tyrant from his seat by war.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>'Tis not his new-made bride shall succor him:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And as for Clarence, as my letters tell me,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>He's very likely now to fall from him,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For matching more for wanton lust than honour,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Or than for strength and safety of our country.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">BONA</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Dear brother, how shall Bona be revenged</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But by thy help to this distressed queen?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">QUEEN MARGARET</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Renowned prince, how shall poor Henry live,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Unless thou rescue him from foul despair?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">BONA</td>
							<td>My quarrel and this English queen's are one.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">WARWICK</td>
							<td>And mine, fair lady Bona, joins with yours.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">KING LEWIS XI</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>And mine with hers, and thine, and Margaret's.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Therefore at last I firmly am resolved</span>
									<br/>
									<span>You shall have aid.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">QUEEN MARGARET</td>
							<td>Let me give humble thanks for all at once.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">KING LEWIS XI</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Then, England's messenger, return in post,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And tell false Edward, thy supposed king,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That Lewis of France is sending over masquers</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To revel it with him and his new bride:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Thou seest what's past, go fear thy king withal.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">BONA</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Tell him, in hope he'll prove a widower shortly,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I'll wear the willow garland for his sake.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">QUEEN MARGARET</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Tell him, my mourning weeds are laid aside,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And I am ready to put armour on.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">WARWICK</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Tell him from me that he hath done me wrong,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And therefore I'll uncrown him ere't be long.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>There's thy reward: be gone. <i>Exit Post</i></span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">KING LEWIS XI</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>But, Warwick,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Thou and Oxford, with five thousand men,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Shall cross the seas, and bid false Edward battle;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And, as occasion serves, this noble queen</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And prince shall follow with a fresh supply.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Yet, ere thou go, but answer me one doubt,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>What pledge have we of thy firm loyalty?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">WARWICK</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>This shall assure my constant loyalty,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That if our queen and this young prince agree,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I'll join mine eldest daughter and my joy</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To him forthwith in holy wedlock bands.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">QUEEN MARGARET</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Yes, I agree, and thank you for your motion.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Son Edward, she is fair and virtuous,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Therefore delay not, give thy hand to Warwick;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And, with thy hand, thy faith irrevocable,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That only Warwick's daughter shall be thine.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">PRINCE EDWARD</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Yes, I accept her, for she well deserves it;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And here, to pledge my vow, I give my hand. <i>He gives his hand to WARWICK</i></span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">KING LEWIS XI</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Why stay we now? These soldiers shall be levied,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And thou, Lord Bourbon, our high admiral,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Shalt waft them over with our royal fleet.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I long till Edward fall by war's mischance,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For mocking marriage with a dame of France. <i>Exeunt all but WARWICK</i></span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">WARWICK</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>I came from Edward as ambassador,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But I return his sworn and mortal foe:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Matter of marriage was the charge he gave me,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But dreadful war shall answer his demand.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Had he none else to make a stale but me?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Then none but I shall turn his jest to sorrow.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I was the chief that raised him to the crown,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And I'll be chief to bring him down again:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Not that I pity Henry's misery,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But seek revenge on Edward's mockery. <i>Exit</i></span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
					</tbody>
				</table>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
