<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Act II</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction z3998:drama">
		<section id="act-2" epub:type="chapter z3998:scene">
			<h2>
				<span epub:type="label">Act</span>
				<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">II</span>
			</h2>
			<section id="scene-2-1" epub:type="z3998:scene">
				<h3>
					<span epub:type="label">Scene</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">I</span>
				</h3>
				<p>A plain near Mortimer’s Cross in Herefordshire.</p>
				<table>
					<tbody>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">A march. Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Edward</b>, <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Richard</b>, and their power.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Edward</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>I wonder how our princely father ‘scaped,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Or whether he be ‘scaped away or no</span>
									<br/>
									<span>From Clifford’s and Northumberland’s pursuit:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Had he been ta’en, we should have heard the news;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Had he been slain, we should have heard the news;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Or had he ‘scaped, methinks we should have heard</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The happy tidings of his good escape.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>How fares my brother? why is he so sad?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Richard</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>I cannot joy, until I be resolved</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Where our right valiant father is become.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I saw him in the battle range about;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And watch’d him how he singled Clifford forth.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Methought he bore him in the thickest troop</span>
									<br/>
									<span>As doth a lion in a herd of neat;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Or as a bear, encompass’d round with dogs,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Who having pinch’d a few and made them cry,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The rest stand all aloof, and bark at him.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>So fared our father with his enemies;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>So fled his enemies my warlike father:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Methinks, ’tis prize enough to be his son.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>See how the morning opes her golden gates,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And takes her farewell of the glorious sun!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>How well resembles it the prime of youth,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Trimm’d like a younker prancing to his love!</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Edward</td>
							<td>Dazzle mine eyes, or do I see three suns?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Richard</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Three glorious suns, each one a perfect sun;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Not separated with the racking clouds,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But sever’d in a pale clear-shining sky.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>See, see! they join, embrace, and seem to kiss,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>As if they vow’d some league inviolable:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Now are they but one lamp, one light, one sun.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>In this the heaven figures some event.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Edward</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>’Tis wondrous strange, the like yet never heard of.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I think it cites us, brother, to the field,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That we, the sons of brave Plantagenet,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Each one already blazing by our meeds,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Should notwithstanding join our lights together</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And over-shine the earth as this the world.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Whate’er it bodes, henceforward will I bear</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Upon my target three fair-shining suns.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Richard</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Nay, bear three daughters: by your leave I speak it,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>You love the breeder better than the male. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter a <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Messenger</b>.</i></span>
									<br/>
									<span>But what art thou, whose heavy looks foretell</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Some dreadful story hanging on thy tongue?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Messenger</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Ah, one that was a woful looker-on</span>
									<br/>
									<span>When as the noble Duke of York was slain,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Your princely father and my loving lord!</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Edward</td>
							<td>O, speak no more, for I have heard too much.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Richard</td>
							<td>Say how he died, for I will hear it all.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Messenger</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Environed he was with many foes,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And stood against them, as the hope of Troy</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Against the Greeks that would have enter’d Troy.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But Hercules himself must yield to odds;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And many strokes, though with a little axe,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Hew down and fell the hardest-timber’d oak.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>By many hands your father was subdued;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But only slaughter’d by the ireful arm</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Of unrelenting Clifford and the queen,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Who crown’d the gracious duke in high despite,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Laugh’d in his face; and when with grief he wept,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The ruthless queen gave him to dry his cheeks</span>
									<br/>
									<span>A napkin steeped in the harmless blood</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Of sweet young Rutland, by rough Clifford slain:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And after many scorns, many foul taunts,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>They took his head, and on the gates of York</span>
									<br/>
									<span>They set the same; and there it doth remain,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The saddest spectacle that e’er I view’d.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Edward</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Sweet Duke of York, our prop to lean upon,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Now thou art gone, we have no staff, no stay.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>O Clifford, boisterous Clifford! thou hast slain</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The flower of Europe for his chivalry;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And treacherously hast thou vanquish’d him,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For hand to hand he would have vanquish’d thee.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Now my soul’s palace is become a prison:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Ah, would she break from hence, that this my body</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Might in the ground be closed up in rest!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For never henceforth shall I joy again,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Never, O never shall I see more joy!</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Richard</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>I cannot weep; for all my body’s moisture</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Scarce serves to quench my furnace-burning heart:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Nor can my tongue unload my heart’s great burthen;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For selfsame wind that I should speak withal</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Is kindling coals that fires all my breast,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And burns me up with flames that tears would quench.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To weep is to make less the depth of grief:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Tears then for babes; blows and revenge for me</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Richard, I bear thy name; I’ll venge thy death,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Or die renowned by attempting it.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Edward</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>His name that valiant duke hath left with thee;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>His dukedom and his chair with me is left.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Richard</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Nay, if thou be that princely eagle’s bird,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Show thy descent by gazing ’gainst the sun:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For chair and dukedom, throne and kingdom say;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Either that is thine, or else thou wert not his. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">March. Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Warwick</b>, <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Montague</b>, and their army.</i></span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Warwick</td>
							<td>How now, fair lords! What fare? what news abroad?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Richard</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Great Lord of Warwick, if we should recount</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Our baleful news, and at each word’s deliverance</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Stab poniards in our flesh till all were told,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The words would add more anguish than the wounds.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>O valiant lord, the Duke of York is slain!</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Edward</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>O Warwick, Warwick! that Plantagenet,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Which held three dearly as his soul’s redemption,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Is by the stern Lord Clifford done to death.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Warwick</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Ten days ago I drown’d these news in tears;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And now, to add more measure to your woes,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I come to tell you things sith then befall’n.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>After the bloody fray at Wakefield fought,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Where your brave father breathed his latest gasp,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Tidings, as swiftly as the posts could run,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Were brought me of your loss and his depart.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I, then in London keeper of the king,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Muster’d my soldiers, gather’d flocks of friends,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And very well appointed, as I thought,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>March’d toward Saint Alban’s to intercept the queen,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Bearing the king in my behalf along;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For by my scouts I was advertised</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That she was coming with a full intent</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To dash our late decree in parliament</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Touching King Henry’s oath and your succession.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Short tale to make, we at Saint Alban’s met</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Our battles join’d, and both sides fiercely fought:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But whether ’twas the coldness of the king,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Who look’d full gently on his warlike queen,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That robb’d my soldiers of their heated spleen;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Or whether ’twas report of her success;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Or more than common fear of Clifford’s rigour,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Who thunders to his captives blood and death,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I cannot judge: but to conclude with truth,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Their weapons like to lightning came and went;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Our soldiers’, like the night-owl’s lazy flight,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Or like an idle thresher with a flail,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Fell gently down, as if they struck their friends.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I cheer’d them up with justice of our cause,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>With promise of high pay and great rewards:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But all in vain; they had no heart to fight,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And we in them no hope to win the day;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>So that we fled; the king unto the queen;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Lord George your brother, Norfolk and myself,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>In haste, post-haste, are come to join with you:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For in the marches here we heard you were,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Making another head to fight again.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Edward</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Where is the Duke of Norfolk, gentle Warwick?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And when came George from Burgundy to England?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Warwick</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Some six miles off the duke is with the soldiers;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And for your brother, he was lately sent</span>
									<br/>
									<span>From your kind aunt, Duchess of Burgundy,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>With aid of soldiers to this needful war.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Richard</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>’Twas odds, belike, when valiant Warwick fled:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Oft have I heard his praises in pursuit,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But ne’er till now his scandal of retire.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Warwick</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Nor now my scandal, Richard, dost thou hear;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For thou shalt know this strong right hand of mine</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Can pluck the diadem from faint Henry’s head,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And wring the awful sceptre from his fist,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Were he as famous and as bold in war</span>
									<br/>
									<span>As he is famed for mildness, peace, and prayer.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Richard</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>I know it well, Lord Warwick; blame me not:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>’Tis love I bear thy glories makes me speak.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But in this troublous time what’s to be done?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Shall we go throw away our coats of steel,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And wrap our bodies in black mourning gowns,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Numbering our Ave-Maries with our beads?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Or shall we on the helmets of our foes</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Tell our devotion with revengeful arms?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>If for the last, say ay, and to it, lords.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Warwick</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Why, therefore Warwick came to seek you out;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And therefore comes my brother Montague.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Attend me, lords. The proud insulting queen,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>With Clifford and the haught Northumberland,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And of their feather many more proud birds,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Have wrought the easy-melting king like wax.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>He swore consent to your succession,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>His oath enrolled in the parliament;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And now to London all the crew are gone,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To frustrate both his oath and what beside</span>
									<br/>
									<span>May make against the house of Lancaster.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Their power, I think, is thirty thousand strong:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Now, if the help of Norfolk and myself,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>With all the friends that thou, brave Earl of March,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Amongst the loving Welshmen canst procure,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Will but amount to five and twenty thousand,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Why, Via! to London will we march amain,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And once again bestride our foaming steeds,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And once again cry ‘Charge upon our foes!’</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But never once again turn back and fly.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Richard</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Ay, now methinks I hear great Warwick speak:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Ne’er may he live to see a sunshine day,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That cries ‘Retire,’ if Warwick bid him stay.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Edward</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Lord Warwick, on thy shoulder will I lean;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And when thou fail’st⁠—as God forbid the hour!⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Must Edward fall, which peril heaven forfend!</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Warwick</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>No longer Earl of March, but Duke of York:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The next degree is England’s royal throne;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For King of England shalt thou be proclaim’d</span>
									<br/>
									<span>In every borough as we pass along;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And he that throws not up his cap for joy</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Shall for the fault make forfeit of his head.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>King Edward, valiant Richard, Montague,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Stay we no longer, dreaming of renown,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But sound the trumpets, and about our task.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Richard</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Then, Clifford, were thy heart as hard as steel,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>As thou hast shown it flinty by thy deeds,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I come to pierce it, or to give thee mine.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Edward</td>
							<td>Then strike up drums: God and Saint George for us! <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter a <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Messenger</b>.</i></td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Warwick</td>
							<td>How now! what news?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Messenger</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>The Duke of Norfolk sends you word by me,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The queen is coming with a puissant host;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And craves your company for speedy counsel.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Warwick</td>
							<td>Why then it sorts, brave warriors, let’s away. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exeunt.</i></td>
						</tr>
					</tbody>
				</table>
			</section>
			<section id="scene-2-2" epub:type="z3998:scene">
				<h3>
					<span epub:type="label">Scene</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">II</span>
				</h3>
				<p>Before York.</p>
				<table>
					<tbody>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Flourish. Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">King Henry VI</b>, <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Queen Margaret</b>, <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Prince Edward</b>, <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Clifford</b>, and <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Northumberland</b>, with drum and trumpets.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Queen Margaret</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Welcome, my lord, to this brave town of York.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Yonder’s the head of that arch-enemy</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That sought to be encompass’d with your crown:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Doth not the object cheer your heart, my lord?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Henry VI</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Ay, as the rocks cheer them that fear their wreck:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To see this sight, it irks my very soul.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Withhold revenge, dear God! ’tis not my fault,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Nor wittingly have I infringed my vow.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Clifford</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>My gracious liege, this too much lenity</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And harmful pity must be laid aside.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To whom do lions cast their gentle looks?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Not to the beast that would usurp their den.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Whose hand is that the forest bear doth lick?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Not his that spoils her young before her face.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Who ‘scapes the lurking serpent’s mortal sting?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Not he that sets his foot upon her back.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The smallest worm will turn being trodden on,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And doves will peck in safeguard of their brood.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Ambitious York doth level at thy crown,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Thou smiling while he knit his angry brows:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>He, but a duke, would have his son a king,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And raise his issue, like a loving sire;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Thou, being a king, blest with a goodly son,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Didst yield consent to disinherit him,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Which argued thee a most unloving father.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Unreasonable creatures feed their young;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And though man’s face be fearful to their eyes,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Yet, in protection of their tender ones,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Who hath not seen them, even with those wings</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Which sometime they have used with fearful flight,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Make war with him that climb’d unto their nest,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Offer their own lives in their young’s defence?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For shame, my liege, make them your precedent!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Were it not pity that this goodly boy</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Should lose his birthright by his father’s fault,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And long hereafter say unto his child,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>‘What my great-grandfather and his grandsire got</span>
									<br/>
									<span>My careless father fondly gave away’?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Ah, what a shame were this! Look on the boy;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And let his manly face, which promiseth</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Successful fortune, steel thy melting heart</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To hold thine own and leave thine own with him.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Henry VI</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Full well hath Clifford play’d the orator,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Inferring arguments of mighty force.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But, Clifford, tell me, didst thou never hear</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That things ill-got had ever bad success?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And happy always was it for that son</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Whose father for his hoarding went to hell?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I’ll leave my son my virtuous deeds behind;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And would my father had left me no more!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For all the rest is held at such a rate</span>
									<br/>
									<span>As brings a thousand-fold more care to keep</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Than in possession and jot of pleasure.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Ah, cousin York! would thy best friends did know</span>
									<br/>
									<span>How it doth grieve me that thy head is here!</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Queen Margaret</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>My lord, cheer up your spirits: our foes are nigh,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And this soft courage makes your followers faint.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>You promised knighthood to our forward son:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Unsheathe your sword, and dub him presently.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Edward, kneel down.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Henry VI</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Edward Plantagenet, arise a knight;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And learn this lesson, draw thy sword in right.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Prince</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>My gracious father, by your kingly leave,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I’ll draw it as apparent to the crown,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And in that quarrel use it to the death.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Clifford</td>
							<td>Why, that is spoken like a toward prince. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter a <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Messenger</b>.</i></td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Messenger</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Royal commanders, be in readiness:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For with a band of thirty thousand men</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Comes Warwick, backing of the Duke of York;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And in the towns, as they do march along,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Proclaims him king, and many fly to him:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Darraign your battle, for they are at hand.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Clifford</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>I would your highness would depart the field:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The queen hath best success when you are absent.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Queen Margaret</td>
							<td>Ay, good my lord, and leave us to our fortune.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Henry VI</td>
							<td>Why, that’s my fortune too; therefore I’ll stay.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Northumberland</td>
							<td>Be it with resolution then to fight.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Prince Edward</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>My royal father, cheer these noble lords</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And hearten those that fight in your defence:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Unsheathe your sword, good father; cry ‘Saint George!’ <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">March. Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Edward</b>, <b epub:type="z3998:persona">George</b>, <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Richard</b>, <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Warwick</b>, <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Norfolk</b>, <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Montague</b>, and Soldiers.</i></span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Edward</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Now, perjured Henry! wilt thou kneel for grace,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And set thy diadem upon my head;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Or bide the mortal fortune of the field?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Queen Margaret</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Go, rate thy minions, proud insulting boy!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Becomes it thee to be thus bold in terms</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Before thy sovereign and thy lawful king?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Edward</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>I am his king, and he should bow his knee;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I was adopted heir by his consent:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Since when, his oath is broke; for, as I hear,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>You, that are king, though he do wear the crown,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Have caused him, by new act of parliament,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To blot out me, and put his own son in.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Clifford</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>And reason too:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Who should succeed the father but the son?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Richard</td>
							<td>Are you there, butcher? O, I cannot speak!</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Clifford</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Ay, crook-back, here I stand to answer thee,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Or any he the proudest of thy sort.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Richard</td>
							<td>’Twas you that kill’d young Rutland, was it not?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Clifford</td>
							<td>Ay, and old York, and yet not satisfied.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Richard</td>
							<td>For God’s sake, lords, give signal to the fight.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Warwick</td>
							<td>What say’st thou, Henry, wilt thou yield the crown?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Queen Margaret</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Why, how now, long-tongued Warwick! dare you speak?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>When you and I met at Saint Alban’s last,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Your legs did better service than your hands.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Warwick</td>
							<td>Then ’twas my turn to fly, and now ’tis thine.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Clifford</td>
							<td>You said so much before, and yet you fled.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Warwick</td>
							<td>’Twas not your valour, Clifford, drove me thence.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Northumberland</td>
							<td>No, nor your manhood that durst make you stay.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Richard</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Northumberland, I hold thee reverently.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Break off the parley; for scarce I can refrain</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The execution of my big-swoln heart</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Upon that Clifford, that cruel child-killer.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Clifford</td>
							<td>I slew thy father, call’st thou him a child?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Richard</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Ay, like a dastard and a treacherous coward,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>As thou didst kill our tender brother Rutland;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But ere sunset I’ll make thee curse the deed.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Henry VI</td>
							<td>Have done with words, my lords, and hear me speak.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Queen Margaret</td>
							<td>Defy them then, or else hold close thy lips.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Henry VI</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>I prithee, give no limits to my tongue:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I am a king, and privileged to speak.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Clifford</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>My liege, the wound that bred this meeting here</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Cannot be cured by words; therefore be still.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Richard</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Then, executioner, unsheathe thy sword:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>By him that made us all, I am resolved</span>
									<br/>
									<span>that Clifford’s manhood lies upon his tongue.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Edward</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Say, Henry, shall I have my right, or no?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>A thousand men have broke their fasts to-day,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That ne’er shall dine unless thou yield the crown.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Warwick</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>If thou deny, their blood upon thy head;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For York in justice puts his armour on.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Prince Edward</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>If that be right which Warwick says is right,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>There is no wrong, but every thing is right.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Richard</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Whoever got thee, there thy mother stands;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For, well I wot, thou hast thy mother’s tongue.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Queen Margaret</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>But thou art neither like thy sire nor dam;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But like a foul mis-shapen stigmatic,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Mark’d by the destinies to be avoided,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>As venom toads, or lizards’ dreadful stings.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Richard</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Iron of Naples hid with English gilt,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Whose father bears the title of a king⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>As if a channel should be call’d the sea⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Shamest thou not, knowing whence thou art extraught,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To let thy tongue detect thy base-born heart?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Edward</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>A wisp of straw were worth a thousand crowns,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To make this shameless callet know herself.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Helen of Greece was fairer far than thou,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Although thy husband may be Menelaus;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And ne’er was Agamemnon’s brother wrong’d</span>
									<br/>
									<span>By that false woman, as this king by thee.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>His father revell’d in the heart of France,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And tamed the king, and made the dauphin stoop;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And had he match’d according to his state,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>He might have kept that glory to this day;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But when he took a beggar to his bed,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And graced thy poor sire with his bridal-day,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Even then that sunshine brew’d a shower for him,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That wash’d his father’s fortunes forth of France,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And heap’d sedition on his crown at home.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For what hath broach’d this tumult but thy pride?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Hadst thou been meek, our title still had slept;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And we, in pity of the gentle king,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Had slipp’d our claim until another age.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">George</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>But when we saw our sunshine made thy spring,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And that thy summer bred us no increase,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>We set the axe to thy usurping root;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And though the edge hath something hit ourselves,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Yet, know thou, since we have begun to strike,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>We’ll never leave till we have hewn thee down,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Or bathed thy growing with our heated bloods.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Edward</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>And, in this resolution, I defy thee;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Not willing any longer conference,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Since thou deniest the gentle king to speak.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Sound trumpets! let our bloody colours wave!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And either victory, or else a grave.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Queen Margaret</td>
							<td>Stay, Edward.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Edward</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>No, wrangling woman, we’ll no longer stay:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>These words will cost ten thousand lives this day. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exeunt.</i></span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
					</tbody>
				</table>
			</section>
			<section id="scene-2-3" epub:type="z3998:scene">
				<h3>
					<span epub:type="label">Scene</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">III</span>
				</h3>
				<p>A field of battle between Towton and Saxton, in Yorkshire.</p>
				<table>
					<tbody>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Alarum. Excursions. Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Warwick</b>.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Warwick</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Forspent with toil, as runners with a race,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I lay me down a little while to breathe;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For strokes received, and many blows repaid,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Have robb’d my strong-knit sinews of their strength,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And spite of spite needs must I rest awhile. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Edward</b>, running.</i></span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Edward</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Smile, gentle heaven! or strike, ungentle death!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For this world frowns, and Edward’s sun is clouded.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Warwick</td>
							<td>How now, my lord! what hap? what hope of good? <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">George</b>.</i></td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">George</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Our hap is loss, our hope but sad despair;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Our ranks are broke, and ruin follows us:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>What counsel give you? whither shall we fly?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Edward</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Bootless is flight, they follow us with wings;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And weak we are and cannot shun pursuit. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Richard</b>.</i></span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Richard</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Ah, Warwick, why hast thou withdrawn thyself?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Thy brother’s blood the thirsty earth hath drunk,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Broach’d with the steely point of Clifford’s lance;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And in the very pangs of death he cried,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Like to a dismal clangour heard from far,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>‘Warwick, revenge! brother, revenge my death!’</span>
									<br/>
									<span>So, underneath the belly of their steeds,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That stain’d their fetlocks in his smoking blood,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The noble gentleman gave up the ghost.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Warwick</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Then let the earth be drunken with our blood:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I’ll kill my horse, because I will not fly.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Why stand we like soft-hearted women here,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Wailing our losses, whiles the foe doth rage;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And look upon, as if the tragedy</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Were play’d in jest by counterfeiting actors?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Here on my knee I vow to God above,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I’ll never pause again, never stand still,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Till either death hath closed these eyes of mine</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Or fortune given me measure of revenge.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Edward</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>O Warwick, I do bend my knee with thine;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And in this vow do chain my soul to thine!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And, ere my knee rise from the earth’s cold face,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I throw my hands, mine eyes, my heart to thee,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Thou setter up and plucker down of kings,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Beseeching thee, if with they will it stands</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That to my foes this body must be prey,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Yet that thy brazen gates of heaven may ope,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And give sweet passage to my sinful soul!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Now, lords, take leave until we meet again,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Where’er it be, in heaven or in earth.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Richard</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Brother, give me thy hand; and, gentle Warwick,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Let me embrace thee in my weary arms:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I, that did never weep, now melt with woe</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That winter should cut off our spring-time so.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Warwick</td>
							<td>Away, away! Once more, sweet lords farewell.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">George</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Yet let us all together to our troops,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And give them leave to fly that will not stay;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And call them pillars that will stand to us;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And, if we thrive, promise them such rewards</span>
									<br/>
									<span>As victors wear at the Olympian games:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>This may plant courage in their quailing breasts;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For yet is hope of life and victory.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Forslow no longer, make we hence amain. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exeunt.</i></span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
					</tbody>
				</table>
			</section>
			<section id="scene-2-4" epub:type="z3998:scene">
				<h3>
					<span epub:type="label">Scene</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">IV</span>
				</h3>
				<p>Another part of the field.</p>
				<table>
					<tbody>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Excursions. Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Richard</b> and <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Clifford</b>.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Richard</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Now, Clifford, I have singled thee alone:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Suppose this arm is for the Duke of York,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And this for Rutland; both bound to revenge,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Wert thou environ’d with a brazen wall.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Clifford</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Now, Richard, I am with thee here alone:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>This is the hand that stabb’d thy father York;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And this the hand that slew thy brother Rutland;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And here’s the heart that triumphs in their death</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And cheers these hands that slew thy sire and brother</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To execute the like upon thyself;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And so, have at thee! <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">They fight. <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Warwick</b> comes; <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Clifford</b>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Richard</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Nay Warwick, single out some other chase;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For I myself will hunt this wolf to death. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exeunt.</i></span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
					</tbody>
				</table>
			</section>
			<section id="scene-2-5" epub:type="z3998:scene">
				<h3>
					<span epub:type="label">Scene</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">V</span>
				</h3>
				<p>Another part of the field.</p>
				<table>
					<tbody>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Alarum. Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">King Henry VI</b> alone.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Henry VI</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>This battle fares like to the morning’s war,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>When dying clouds contend with growing light,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>What time the shepherd, blowing of his nails,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Can neither call it perfect day nor night.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Now sways it this way, like a mighty sea</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Forced by the tide to combat with the wind;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Now sways it that way, like the selfsame sea</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Forced to retire by fury of the wind:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Sometime the flood prevails, and then the wind;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Now one the better, then another best;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Both tugging to be victors, breast to breast,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Yet neither conqueror nor conquered:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>So is the equal of this fell war.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Here on this molehill will I sit me down.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To whom God will, there be the victory!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For Margaret my queen, and Clifford too,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Have chid me from the battle; swearing both</span>
									<br/>
									<span>They prosper best of all when I am thence.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Would I were dead! if God’s good will were so;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For what is in this world but grief and woe?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>O God! methinks it were a happy life,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To be no better than a homely swain;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To sit upon a hill, as I do now,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To carve out dials quaintly, point by point,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Thereby to see the minutes how they run,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>How many make the hour full complete;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>How many hours bring about the day;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>How many days will finish up the year;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>How many years a mortal man may live.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>When this is known, then to divide the times:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>So many hours must I tend my flock;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>So many hours must I take my rest;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>So many hours must I contemplate;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>So many hours must I sport myself;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>So many days my ewes have been with young;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>So many weeks ere the poor fools will ean:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>So many years ere I shall shear the fleece:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>So minutes, hours, days, months, and years,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Pass’d over to the end they were created,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Would bring white hairs unto a quiet grave.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Ah, what a life were this! how sweet! how lovely!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Gives not the hawthorn-bush a sweeter shade</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To shepherds looking on their silly sheep,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Than doth a rich embroider’d canopy</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To kings that fear their subjects’ treachery?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>O, yes, it doth; a thousand-fold it doth.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And to conclude, the shepherd’s homely curds,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>His cold thin drink out of his leather bottle.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>His wonted sleep under a fresh tree’s shade,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>All which secure and sweetly he enjoys,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Is far beyond a prince’s delicates,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>His viands sparkling in a golden cup,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>His body couched in a curious bed,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>When care, mistrust, and treason waits on him. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Alarum. Enter a <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Son that has killed his father</b>, dragging in the dead body.</i></span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Son</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Ill blows the wind that profits nobody.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>This man, whom hand to hand I slew in fight,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>May be possessed with some store of crowns;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And I, that haply take them from him now,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>May yet ere night yield both my life and them</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To some man else, as this dead man doth me.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Who’s this? O God! it is my father’s face,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Whom in this conflict I unwares have kill’d.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>O heavy times, begetting such events!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>From London by the king was I press’d forth;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>My father, being the Earl of Warwick’s man,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Came on the part of York, press’d by his master;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And I, who at his hands received my life, him</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Have by my hands of life bereaved him.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Pardon me, God, I knew not what I did!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And pardon, father, for I knew not thee!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>My tears shall wipe away these bloody marks;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And no more words till they have flow’d their fill.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Henry VI</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>O piteous spectacle! O bloody times!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Whiles lions war and battle for their dens,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Poor harmless lambs abide their enmity.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Weep, wretched man, I’ll aid thee tear for tear;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And let our hearts and eyes, like civil war,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Be blind with tears, and break o’ercharged with grief. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter a <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Father that has killed his son</b>, bringing in the body.</i></span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Father</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Thou that so stoutly hast resisted me,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Give me thy gold, if thou hast any gold:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For I have bought it with an hundred blows.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But let me see: is this our foeman’s face?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Ah, no, no, no, it is mine only son!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Ah, boy, if any life be left in thee,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Throw up thine eye! see, see what showers arise,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Blown with the windy tempest of my heart,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Upon thy words, that kill mine eye and heart!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>O, pity, God, this miserable age!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>What stratagems, how fell, how butcherly,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Erroneous, mutinous and unnatural,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>This deadly quarrel daily doth beget!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>O boy, thy father gave thee life too soon,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And hath bereft thee of thy life too late!</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Henry VI</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Woe above woe! grief more than common grief!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>O that my death would stay these ruthful deeds!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>O pity, pity, gentle heaven, pity!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The red rose and the white are on his face,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The fatal colours of our striving houses:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The one his purple blood right well resembles;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The other his pale cheeks, methinks, presenteth:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Wither one rose, and let the other flourish;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>If you contend, a thousand lives must wither.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Son</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>How will my mother for a father’s death</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Take on with me and ne’er be satisfied!</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Father</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>How will my wife for slaughter of my son</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Shed seas of tears and ne’er be satisfied!</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Henry VI</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>How will the country for these woful chances</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Misthink the king and not be satisfied!</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Son</td>
							<td>Was ever son so rued a father’s death?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Father</td>
							<td>Was ever father so bemoan’d his son?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Henry VI</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Was ever king so grieved for subjects’ woe?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Much is your sorrow; mine ten times so much.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Son</td>
							<td>I’ll bear thee hence, where I may weep my fill. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exit with the body.</i></td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Father</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>These arms of mine shall be thy winding-sheet;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>My heart, sweet boy, shall be thy sepulchre,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For from my heart thine image ne’er shall go;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>My sighing breast shall be thy funeral bell;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And so obsequious will thy father be,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Even for the loss of thee, having no more,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>As Priam was for all his valiant sons.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I’ll bear thee hence; and let them fight that will,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For I have murdered where I should not kill. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exit with the body.</i></span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Henry VI</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Sad-hearted men, much overgone with care,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Here sits a king more woful than you are. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Alarums: excursions. Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Queen Margaret</b>, <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Prince Edward</b>, and <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Exeter</b>.</i></span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Prince Edward</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Fly, father, fly! for all your friends are fled,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And Warwick rages like a chafed bull:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Away! for death doth hold us in pursuit.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Queen Margaret</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Mount you, my lord; towards Berwick post amain:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Edward and Richard, like a brace of greyhounds</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Having the fearful flying hare in sight,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>With fiery eyes sparkling for very wrath,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And bloody steel grasp’d in their ireful hands,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Are at our backs; and therefore hence amain.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Exeter</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Away! for vengeance comes along with them:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Nay, stay not to expostulate, make speed;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Or else come after: I’ll away before.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Henry VI</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Nay, take me with thee, good sweet Exeter:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Not that I fear to stay, but love to go</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Whither the queen intends. Forward; away! <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exeunt.</i></span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
					</tbody>
				</table>
			</section>
			<section id="scene-2-6" epub:type="z3998:scene">
				<h3>
					<span epub:type="label">Scene</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VI</span>
				</h3>
				<p>Another part of the field.</p>
				<table>
					<tbody>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">A loud alarum. Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Clifford</b>, wounded.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Clifford</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Here burns my candle out; ay, here it dies,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Which, whiles it lasted, gave King Henry light.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>O Lancaster, I fear thy overthrow</span>
									<br/>
									<span>More than my body’s parting with my soul!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>My love and fear glued many friends to thee;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And, now I fall, thy tough commixture melts.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Impairing Henry, strengthening misproud York,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The common people swarm like summer flies;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And whither fly the gnats but to the sun?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And who shines now but Henry’s enemies?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>O Phoebus, hadst thou never given consent</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That Phaethon should cheque thy fiery steeds,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Thy burning car never had scorch’d the earth!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And, Henry, hadst thou sway’d as kings should do,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Or as thy father and his father did,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Giving no ground unto the house of York,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>They never then had sprung like summer flies;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I and ten thousand in this luckless realm</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Had left no mourning widows for our death;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And thou this day hadst kept thy chair in peace.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For what doth cherish weeds but gentle air?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And what makes robbers bold but too much lenity?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Bootless are plaints, and cureless are my wounds;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>No way to fly, nor strength to hold out flight:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The foe is merciless, and will not pity;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For at their hands I have deserved no pity.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The air hath got into my deadly wounds,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And much effuse of blood doth make me faint.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Come, York and Richard, Warwick and the rest;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I stabb’d your fathers’ bosoms, split my breast. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">He faints.</i></span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Alarum and retreat. Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Edward</b>, <b epub:type="z3998:persona">George</b>, <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Richard</b>, <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Montague</b>, <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Warwick</b>, and Soldiers.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Edward</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Now breathe we, lords: good fortune bids us pause,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And smooth the frowns of war with peaceful looks.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Some troops pursue the bloody-minded queen,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That led calm Henry, though he were a king,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>As doth a sail, fill’d with a fretting gust,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Command an argosy to stem the waves.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But think you, lords, that Clifford fled with them?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Warwick</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>No, ’tis impossible he should escape,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For, though before his face I speak the words</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Your brother Richard mark’d him for the grave:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And wheresoe’er he is, he’s surely dead. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Clifford</b> groans, and dies.</i></span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Edward</td>
							<td>Whose soul is that which takes her heavy leave?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Richard</td>
							<td>A deadly groan, like life and death’s departing.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Edward</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>See who it is: and, now the battle’s ended,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>If friend or foe, let him be gently used.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Richard</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Revoke that doom of mercy, for ’tis Clifford;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Who not contented that he lopp’d the branch</span>
									<br/>
									<span>In hewing Rutland when his leaves put forth,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But set his murdering knife unto the root</span>
									<br/>
									<span>From whence that tender spray did sweetly spring,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I mean our princely father, Duke of York.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Warwick</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>From off the gates of York fetch down the head,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Your father’s head, which Clifford placed there;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Instead whereof let this supply the room:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Measure for measure must be answered.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Edward</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Bring forth that fatal screech-owl to our house,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That nothing sung but death to us and ours:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Now death shall stop his dismal threatening sound,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And his ill-boding tongue no more shall speak.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Warwick</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>I think his understanding is bereft.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Speak, Clifford, dost thou know who speaks to thee?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Dark cloudy death o’ershades his beams of life,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And he nor sees nor hears us what we say.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Richard</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>O, would he did! and so perhaps he doth:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>’Tis but his policy to counterfeit,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Because he would avoid such bitter taunts</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Which in the time of death he gave our father.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">George</td>
							<td>If so thou think’st, vex him with eager words.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Richard</td>
							<td>Clifford, ask mercy and obtain no grace.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Edward</td>
							<td>Clifford, repent in bootless penitence.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Warwick</td>
							<td>Clifford, devise excuses for thy faults.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">George</td>
							<td>While we devise fell tortures for thy faults.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Richard</td>
							<td>Thou didst love York, and I am son to York.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Edward</td>
							<td>Thou pitied’st Rutland; I will pity thee.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">George</td>
							<td>Where’s Captain Margaret, to fence you now?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Warwick</td>
							<td>They mock thee, Clifford: swear as thou wast wont.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Richard</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>What, not an oath? nay, then the world goes hard</span>
									<br/>
									<span>When Clifford cannot spare his friends an oath.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I know by that he’s dead; and, by my soul,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>If this right hand would buy two hour’s life,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That I in all despite might rail at him,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>This hand should chop it off, and with the</span>
									<br/>
									<span>issuing blood</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Stifle the villain whose unstanched thirst</span>
									<br/>
									<span>York and young Rutland could not satisfy.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Warwick</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Ay, but he’s dead: off with the traitor’s head,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And rear it in the place your father’s stands.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And now to London with triumphant march,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>There to be crowned England’s royal king:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>From whence shall Warwick cut the sea to France,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And ask the Lady Bona for thy queen:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>So shalt thou sinew both these lands together;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And, having France thy friend, thou shalt not dread</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The scatter’d foe that hopes to rise again;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For though they cannot greatly sting to hurt,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Yet look to have them buzz to offend thine ears.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>First will I see the coronation;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And then to Brittany I’ll cross the sea,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To effect this marriage, so it please my lord.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Edward</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Even as thou wilt, sweet Warwick, let it be;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For in thy shoulder do I build my seat,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And never will I undertake the thing</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Wherein thy counsel and consent is wanting.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Richard, I will create thee Duke of Gloucester,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And George, of Clarence: Warwick, as ourself,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Shall do and undo as him pleaseth best.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Richard</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Let me be Duke of Clarence, George of Gloucester;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For Gloucester’s dukedom is too ominous.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Warwick</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Tut, that’s a foolish observation:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Richard, be Duke of Gloucester. Now to London,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To see these honours in possession. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exeunt.</i></span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
					</tbody>
				</table>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
